[Music]
Good day I'm Norman wildberger in this video we're
going to have a further look at Newton's method
for finding approximate solutions to equations
Newton's method is the most powerful General
method that we have for solving this problem it's
simple and Elementary but it applies in fact in
a wide variety of situations last time we talked
about solving a quadratic equation a very simple
one to find square roots using Newton's method
today we're going to look at cube roots so first
of all a cube is a number of the form a cubed a *
a * a for some number a and in the natural number
context the cubes are these ones here 1 2 cubed
is 8 8 3 cubed is 27 4 cubed is 64 5 cubed is
125 6 cubed is 218 7 cubed is 343 8 cubed is 512 9
cubed is 729 10 cubed is 1,000 11 cubed is 1331 12
cubed is 1728 13 cubed is 2,197 14 cubed is 2744
and so on in the rational number context cubes
are of the form well a rational number raised to
the 3 power so m/ n where M and N are integers we
raise that to the third power then of course we
get M cubed Over N cubed so this will be a ratio
or quotient of two cubes of this form here for
example maybe 64 over 27 or 2744 4 over 343 but
this in fact simplifies because there's a common
factor turns out just to be 8 to one or eight so
that's what a cube is not surprisingly not all
numbers are cubes and let's prove this theorem
here that the number five is not a cube when we
think of five as being a rational number so proof
let's suppose that in fact it is a cube so let's
suppose that 5 equals some rational number M /n
cubed and we'll suppose that these two integers M
and N are in reduced form which means they have no
common factors so in other words we've already
divided out any common factors that they may
have and now we can assume they have no more
common factors well then we'll rearrange this
equation by multiplying the denominator so that
it gets up here 5 n cubed = M cubed n and M are
both integers so we can deduce some things here
and the argument is very similar to ucl's proof
that the square < TK of two doesn't really exist
so the first thing we see is that this number mq
Cub must be divisible by five because it's 5times
some integer and that means that M itself must be
divisible by five because five is a prime so if
it divides M cubed it must divide M as well well
that means that m is a multiple of five say
5 * k for some other integer K well knowing
that we can then go back to the this equation and
replace the M with 5K so we get 5 n Cub = 5K all
cubed we expand that out to get 125 K cubed
cancel some five on both sides to give us n
cubed = 25 K cubed and now we see that n itself
must also be divisible by five because n cubed
is divisible by five this is obviously multiple
of five and so by the same argument n must be
divisible by five so we've shown that both M and
N are divisible by five and that contradicts our
initial assumption that they had no common factor
and so our assumption that 5 is equal to a cube of
a rational number is false conclusion five cannot
be written as a cube so the same problems that we
had for the square < TK of two we now see we
have also for this symbol here this is now a
problematic object because we've just shown that
five is not a cube the usual meaning of this when
people write something like that down it's like
a square root sign with a three there it means
that it representing a number say R which has
the property that R cubed is equal to 5 that's
usually what we mean when we write r equals this
particular symbol but we've just established as
a theorem that there is no such number R and
so we're not really justified in writing down
this symbol this is a nonsense symbol just in fact
the same way as this is in fact a nonsense symbol
at least if we interpret it in the usual way now
there's a couple of approaches to to try to deal
with this and they're the same three approaches
that we had for sare < TK of two so one way is to
say all right we'll admit that there is no number
R which is exactly having the property that R
Cub equal 5 but maybe we can take an applied
approach and we'll write this thing down and
just say that this refers to an approximation to
a cubed root of 5 in other words it's referring
to a number which is pretty close to having the
property that R cubed equals 5 that's a perfectly
legitimate point of view to take sort of the point
of view of an applied mathematician who's happy if
they have some number say to 10 decimal places
which is pretty close to being a cube root of
5 there's also an algebraic approach which is
more subtle but which thinks about this thing
here as being a new symbol inside a particular
extension field of the rational numbers in other
words there is a way of creating a slightly
larger field containing the rational numbers
but with a few extra symbols in it in which it's
possible to identify something which is acting
like this thing in other words which has the
property in this field of having its cubed B5
that's a little bit subtle and I will
be talking about this kind of algebraic
construction involving extension fields of the
rationals at some later point it's really more an
undergraduate construction at a higher level than
what we're talking about right now nevertheless
that is a valid approach to trying to create
something which could legitimately be called
the cubed root of 5 then there is the standard
standard approach which almost everybody takes
which is to think that the Cub root of 5 is some
real number given by an infinite decimal in this
case this infinite decimal starts like this 17099
75 946 and goes on and on in some unfathomable
way forever and forever just like the square <
TK of Two And so this is one kind of approach
the analytic approach to the existence of such
a thing and this thing doesn't make sense this
doesn't work so again we have the same kinds
of ambiguity that we had with the square < TK
of two it's hard to definitively say that this
thing doesn't exist because it does exist if
you interpret it as an approximation or if you
interpret it in an extension field but the claim
that this doesn't exist in the real number sense
that's the claim that actually really holds water
okay so the standard way of thinking about this is
flawed Newton's method is a concrete computational
approach which does not pretend to get some real
number irrational number answer what it tries to
do is to get an approximate rational value to
the solution of an equation and that's what
it succeeds very well at doing so let's have a
look at Newton's method for solving X Cub = 5
approximately so we're going to consider the
function y = x cubed in high school language
but we prefer to think about the poly number P
equal Alpha cubed and I'll just remind you that
for us a poly number is really just one of these
lists of numbers written in a special way so it's
a very finite concrete explicit object and here's
the graph or part of the graph of this poly number
with the usual X and Y coordinates and I've chosen
my scale here so that I can fit a reasonable
amount of this graph into the picture at zero the
value is zero at one we have the value at one at
two we have a value of eight and the graph is a
little bit symmetrical through here so if we go
like this then the point -1 -1 is also on it the
point - 2 - 8 is also on and so on now what are we
doing when we are looking at this equation x Cub
= 5 we are looking to see where if anywhere this
graph takes on the value five in other words we're
looking to see see where the height is five in
other words where the graph meets this horizontal
line Y = 5 and the theorem that we've just
established is that there is no point which lies
both on this line and on the graph because there
is no number X such that X Cub = 5 so that might
be but that does not bother Isaac Newton Isaac
Newton says that's fine I don't care we are going
to find numbers which are close to being both on
this line and on this graph and if we're close
enough to having those two properties satisfied
that's going to be all what we need for the vast
majority of concrete problems so what is Newton's
strategy the strategy is to choose an initial G
guess let's say for the sake of argument R1 equal
1 so we're going to choose a point on the xaxis
as our first guess and then what we're going to do
is we're going to compute the tangent line to the
curve or the cubic at the point R1 so the tangent
line to the curve at that goes through that point
there that's in red here and we're going to see
where that tangent line meets this line Y = 5 in
that point there and if we look down we'll see
what the x coordinate of that point is and we'll
call it R2 so we start off with R1 we go up to the
curve make a tangent see where that tangent meets
y = 5 and then come back down that's our second
point and then we're going to continue that so
from R1 to R2 to R3 and so on and Newton's idea
is that these numbers here will start getting
closer and closer they will start bunching
together and they will Bunch together closer and
closer to a point over here which is approaching
the curve so for example at R2 if we would have to
go all the way up to this point on the curve look
at the tangent line at that point and then again
look to see where it meets the yal 5 line right
there and then that would be our third Point R3 so
that's the idea we're going to find R1 R2 R3 and
see sort of where those points are headed after
we compute a fair number of them and the obvious
sort of technical thing that we need to be able to
do is we need to be able to calculate a tangent to
to this curve at some arbitrary point so knowing
the base point R here what is the equation of that
tangent and that's exactly what the algebraic
calculus does so pleasantly for us so how does
that work well we're starting with the poly number
Alpha cubed the first thing we do is we have a
look to see what what translation does to that
poly number so we evaluate at Alpha plus r where
R is some unknown quantity That We're translating
by we get Alpha + R cubed we expand that out using
the binomial theorem in Powers increasing of Alpha
and then from that we get the tailor expansion of
the Pol at R by taking this and replacing Alpha
with Alpha minus r so this reverts to just P of
Alpha and here these Alphas are replaced with
Alpha minus RS so this is just a rewrite of
the original poly number if you expanded this
all out you'd find everything cancels and you
would just get Alpha cubed but it's a rewrite
that expresses it as a sum of powers of alpha
minus r rather than powers of alpha and it's
from that that we can read off the tangent line
immediately so the tangent line is what we get
when we suppress the degree 2 and three terms so
we're just looking at this part of it R cubed +
3 r^ 2 * Alpha minus r that's the first tangent
to P at R and we can expand here a little bit
so we get 3 r^ 2 Alpha as one term and then
the 3 r^ 2 * - r will'll be -3 R cubed combines
a little bit with this to give us -2 R cubed so
this is a more compact form for the tangent line
if you like to think in terms of X and Y this is
the line y = -2 RB + 3 r^ 2 x x is playing
the traditional role that we're using Alpha
for so if we had an X coordinate R here then
the equation of this line here the tangent
line to the curve at the point above R that's
exactly this and now we're interested in where
that tangent line meets this line Y = 5 so
we need to set the equation of the tangent
line equal to five we're asking for what Alpha
value or x value if you prefer do we get a value
of five for the height that'll exactly give us
that point there so we're looking to solve for
Alpha where we thinking of R is being given
to us and then when we do that we get Alpha
equals let's bring this to the other side then
divide by 3 R 2 we get 2 R Cub + 5 all over 3
R 2ed so what that is is the x coordinate
of this point right here let's call it R
Prime and it's Pleasant that it can be Rewritten
in an interesting way we can take the 1/3 out and
then we have a 2 R because the R cubed and this
R 2 cancel a little bit to give us 2 R plus 5/ r
2 and when we look at it this way we can see a
convex combination of numbers in the quadratic
case we had a an average of two numbers this is
also something of an average but it's a weighted
average it's 2 * r + 1 * this all divided by
three and that has an interesting geometrical
interpretation it means that if you have R there
and if you compute 5 over R 2 say that's over here
then this value that we're getting our Prime is
in between here and here and it's in the ratio
of 1 to 2 that's what this 1/3 of 2 * this + 1
* that is telling us it's a convex combination
uh so that uh this is weighted a little bit
more it's weighted twice as much as this so
the point is actually closer to this uh value
to this value so we said we're going to start
with R1 = 1 and there's the recursion that
we've just established that once we have one
value of R say R subn then the next value is
given by 2 RN + 5 rn^ 2 all of that * 1/3 so
if we start with r = 1 then at the first step
we're going to have 2 + 5 all over 3 that's 7
thir then at the next step we plug 7/3 into
here for RN and compute that we get 821 over
441 the next step we plug this in here and here
compute we get this number here and at this stage
you might ask well is this a good approximation
to what's usually called the cubed root of 5 if
you get out a calculator and ask it to compute
cubed root of 5 well it will give you a number
maybe it will give you this number that's not
really the Cub root of 5 that's a number which
is approximately the Cub root of 5 that's what a
calculator gives you and how close are we at this
point to that number that the calculator would
give us well a little bit close but not that
close we're about at 1. 72201 so we're getting
there but some more work is going to have to be
required and uh so I point out again that
this is a weighted Babylonian method we're
taking a convex combination of the value at one
point and 5 over the value squared RN 5 over RN
2qu and the new value RN + 1 is somewhere in
between here weighted in the ratio of 1 to 2
so here's a natural question I suppose is this 2:
one ratio that's occurring here this two and this
one is that kind of optimum is that Optimum
waiting for approximating quickly suppose
we had done the standard Babylonian thing and
just taken the average between RN and 5 rn^ 2
that will also get closer and closer closer
to being an approximate Cub root of 5 but I
think you will find that it does so slower than
this one now I know that people who uh who do
this kind of thing a lot know the answer to this
question maybe someone can enlighten me uh is 2:
one obviously the best ratio to have in here for
this approximation to go as fast as possible with
this cubic example it's possible to illustrate a
interesting variant of the Newton's method which
is a little bit more sophisticated we might call
it the quadratic Newton method the idea is pretty
similar except that we're going to use not the
tangent line to the black curve at a point we're
going to use the tangent conic which is a parabola
the advantage is that close to this point at least
this tangent conic as you can see here is a better
approximation to the curve than is the tangent
line it hugs the curve a little bit more closely
than does the tangent line and in this case for
example if we start at Ral 1 a tangent line would
give us this as the new point the tangent conic
would give us this point which is much closer to
being approximately on the intersection between
our curve and Y = 5 so to make that work we need
the equation for the tangent conic so the second
tangent and we get that by looking at the tailor
expansion of our poly number which we already have
and taking the terms up to degree 2 so there was
the tangent line up to degree 1 we're going to go
one step further and include the terms of degree
2 a little bit of simplif ification which I'll
leave you to check shows that that becomes
pleasantly R Cub - 3 R 2 Alpha + 3 R Alpha
squared if you want to think in terms of X and
Y this would be the curve R Cub - 3 r^ 2 x + 3
R x^2 that's a function of X that depends on the
R value that we have chosen to specify a point
on the original curve of course there are lots
of tangent conics for different values of R we
get a lot of different tangent conics all right
if we start at the point Ral 1 then this is this
particular Parabola and I've graphed it for you
right there this is a a better approximation and
it meets this line Y = 5 well when we set this
equal to 5 or 3 Alp 2 - 3 Alp - 4 = 0 but now
the price that we have to pay is to find Alpha
now for our second iterate we need to solve this
quadratic equation instead of the linear equation
that we had to solve when using the tangent line
well that quadratic equation we have again the
same kinds of issues that we did with the video
last time we have to solve a quadratic equation
but let us suppose that you have a calculator
that solves quadratic equations quickly in
particular that has a square root button
okay if you have a square root button which of
course just gives approximate square roots but
then you can solve quadratic equations like
this approximately in that case it's not hard
at all to use the quadratic formula to solve
this for Alpha okay there's two choices the
relevant one is 1758 and then that's our next
value 1. 758 there that we can then use to to
iterate so then what we what we would do is
we would go up here to the curve again and
use the same formula with r equal to this now
to compute the tangent conic at that new point
and see where that tangent conic met the line
Y = 5 and and that turns out to be 17996 3 so
after two iterations of this quadratic Newtons
method we're already pretty close to the value
for the approximate value for the cube root of 5
that a calculator will spit out for you up to 10
decimal places or whatever that's pretty good
agreement for Just Two iterations so this is
showing you a little bit of the power of having
not just tangent lines at our disposal but also
being a little bit flexible and being able to use
a tangent conic or maybe even some higher tangents
for some practical problems now let's have just a
few exercises so you can practice some of this fun
stuff our first exercise is to find approximate
solutions to X Cub = 7 and X Cub = -3 using
Newton's method and you might try to set yourself
some Bound for example 1 1000 and try to find an X
that's within 1,000 of 7 or 1,000 of minus 3 the
second exercise same kind of thing but using the
quadratic Newton's method so now you're looking
for tangent conics and finding an approximation
using tangent and you can use a calculator to
find approximate square roots so you're allowed
to use a square root button on your calculator
to solve or help you solve a quadratic equation
approximately this Newton's method that we've
been talking about is quite a lovely thing and
next time we're going to apply it to more General
quadratic and cubic equations and we're going to
start thinking about it a little bit more flexibly
A key idea that I want to get you thinking about
is this realization that most equations you
cannot solve but they can often be solved
approximately and that's all what a scientist or
an engineer or an applied mathematician wants and
needs it's some kind of really idle fantasy
to suppose that given an equation we can just
wave our hands and talk and create Solutions
where in fact none exist but that is in some
sense what the the setup of the real numbers
is designed to do it's designed to fabricate
out of thin air without any work solutions
to equations which in fact really don't have
Solutions so it's an idea that you need
to think about and hopefully with this
discussion of Newton's method you will see the
point of that discussion you will see what I'm
getting at it's approximation that's important
so next time General quadratics and cubics via
Newton's method I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening a